Course Syllabus for MEDB 5508 Introduction to SQL
Introduction
SQL (Structured Query Language) is the primary language responsible for managing data and data structures contained within a relational database management system (RDBMS). Put simply, SQL is the language we use to interact with a database. A working knowledge of SQL is a vital skill for anyone involved in quantitative research. This course will introduce retrieving data using the SQL SELECT Statement, restricting and sorting data, reporting aggregated data using the group functions, displaying data from multiple tables, write subqueries and more through hands-on exercises. Students will develop the fundamental skills needed in retrieving, sorting, aggregating and displaying datasets using Structured Query Language (SQL).

This course will provide a working familiarity with SQL. Students are not expected to have advanced programming or statistical analysis skills other than the ability to create and modify text files. A basic understanding of statistical terminology and a working familiarity with computer-based data files (e.g., Excel) is necessary. The class will introduce basic methods for SQL (Structured Query Language). This class will not cover database administration, installation, and configuration but will provide you with a firm foundation to address these areas in your advanced classes or in your research efforts, including thesis/dissertation research.

Instructor Information

Department: Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics
Instructor-contact information: Steve Simon 816-235-6617, simons@umkc.edu
Instructor- contact information: Suman Sahil 816-235-1812, sumans@umkc.edu
Office location: Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, School of Medicine, M5- 100
Office hours: By appointment; Assistance is available via email and by pre-arranged appointment.
Allow up to 24 hours to receive a response from the instructor to an email enquiry.
Email enquiries sent outside the regular work week may take longer for a response.
Course Location: On-line

Catalog Information
Subject Designation: Medical Bioinformatics, MEDB
Catalog Number: MEDB 5508
Course Title: Introduction to SQL
Catalog Course Description – This course is an introduction to SQL programming. The course is designed to teach students basic skills that will prepare them to use SQL for data analysis.
Credit hours: 2 credit hours
Prerequisites – none
Course Attributes – none
Course Format – Lecture
Course Instructional Mode – Instructor Led Online Asynchronous

Course Information
Required and Recommended Materials
There is NO required textbook for this class.

Recommended resources for future work with SQL.

Textbook: Learning SQL- Master SQL Fundamentals, By Alan Beaulieu Publisher: O'Reilly Media. Dr. Simon and Suman Sahil have copies of this book and students may review by appointment.

Online tutorials:
https://www.w3schools.com/sql/
May be used as a step by step tutorial or you as a reference to learn more about a specific SQL command.

http://www.sqltutorial.org/
This site organizes the SQL commands into groups (e.g., Filtering Data, Aggregate Functions) for easy review.

Evaluation and Grading Criteria
This class will be taught as an asynchronous online course. It will be graded on a credit/no credit basis.

This course will use SQL for all assignments and the final project. Students will have access to the SQL program either directly on a computer that has SQL installed, or through Insights Platform (kc-med-insightw.umkc.edu). The Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics has student computer workstations available that can be used by arrangement.

Students will view instructor-led videos that show how to use basic SQL commands on a small data set. After each video, students will prepare a homework assignment that reproduces some of the examples shown in the video, but using a different provided database. Students will turn in the output of their SQL code, but limit this output to an amount small enough to illustrate what was done (typically 10 rows and 5 columns). Students will also include the original SQL code in an appendix. These assignments will be graded on a pass/fail basis.

For a final project, students will prepare a database of their own choosing with at least two tables and will manipulate this database using SQL commands to produce at least two interesting aggregate statistics and at least two different joins. Students will include the original SQL code in an appendix. These assignments will be graded on a pass/fail basis.

Students who successfully complete the final project and at least 90% of the homework assignments will receive credit for the course.

Schedule of Course Topics and Assignments
Each major topic (Overview, Options for running SQL, etc.) will be covered in a separate video. Most videos after the introduction section will have a homework assignment associated with it that will ask students to run examples similar to the video, but using a separate provided database. Students have access to the SQL program, either directly on a computer that has SQL installed, or through Insight Platform (kc-med-insightw.umkc.edu). It is important for all students to progress through the class at more or less the same pace (roughly two videos and homework assignments per week). Students who need extra time for assignments should seek permission IN ADVANCE from the instructors.

A Discussion Board area will be established in the course Canvas site in order to have a space for questions and answers that will be available to all students. Note – if you are getting a SQL error message you don’t understand, you can copy the error message into the Description box. If you want a section of coding reviewed because you are having a problem with it, you can also copy the text into the Description box.

The instructor will review and respond to items posted on the Discussion Board on a regular basis. If you have not gotten a response within a day or two, send an email to the instructor asking her to review your question in the discussion forum.

Introduction
Overview

• What is a relational database

• Basic database terminology: table, record, field

• History of the SQL language

Options for running SQL

• Command line versus graphical user interface

• Running SQL from inside R and SAS

Database security

• Protecting passwords

• Preventing SQL Injection attacks

Retrieving data from single tables
Retrieving Data Using the SQL SELECT Statement

• Retrieving a limited number of fields

• Retrieving distinct values

• Changing field names

Sorting and Restricting Data

• Limit the rows that are retrieved by a query

• Sort the rows that are retrieved by a query

• Random sample

Null values

• Logic statements involving NULL values

• Excluding records with NULL values

Using Single-Row Functions to Customize Output

• Describe various types of functions available in SQL

• Use character, number, and date functions in SELECT statements

• How functions handle NULL values

Reporting Aggregated Data Using the Group Functions

• Describe the use of group functions

• Identify the available group functions

• Group data by using the GROUP BY clause

• Include or exclude grouped rows by using the HAVING clause

Using Conversion Functions and Conditional Expressions

• CASE statement

• Manipulating dates

Retrieving data from multiple tables
Overview

• Basic terminology: primary keys, foreign keys

• One to one, many to one, many to many merges

• Reading a database schema

Displaying Data from Multiple Tables

• Generate a Cartesian product of all rows from two or more tables

• Matching using an equijoin

• Matching using the NOT EXISTS criteria

• The importance of aliases in joining tables

• Handling unmatched records: inner, left, right, and outer join

• Join a table to itself by using a self-join

Storage and retrieval of longitudinal data

• Separating time varying from time constant data

• Creating a “tall and thin” format for longitudinal data

• Creating a “short and fat” format for longitudinal data

• Computing change scores

Using the Set Operators

• Describe set operators

• Use a set operator to combine multiple queries into a single query

Using Subqueries to Solve Queries

• Describe the types of problems that the subqueries can solve

• Define subqueries

• Write single-row and multiple-row subqueries

• List the types of subqueries

Final Project
For the final project, find a publicly available database on the Internet, use a database that you have access to at your job (make sure you are not violating any company policy by using this database for a homework assignment), or create a database of your own from two or more flat files. Retrieve data from this database using at least one join command and display a subset of this data along with your SQL code. Add a brief paragraph explaining what you did in simple English. Create a table of summary statistics using the GROUP BY clause and present the results. Add a brief paragraph explaining what these results mean in simple English. Conduct at least one additional query using some of the SQL commands you used in this class. Show the SQL code for this query and explain what it does in simple English. The final project is due by Friday of finals week.

Student Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this course, students will be able to:

• Retrieve Data Using the SQL SELECT Statement

• Restrict and Sort Data

• Use Single-Row Functions to Customize Output

• Report Aggregated Data Using the Group Functions

• Use Conversion Functions and Conditional Expressions

• Display Data from Multiple Tables using joins

• Use the Set Operators

• Use Subqueries to Solve Queries

Course Expectations, Course Policies, Requirements and Standards for Student Coursework and Student Behavior.
UMKC Resources & Policy Statements
Important UMKC Resources and Policies are applicable to every course and every student at UMKC. These are located in the Canvas site for this course by clicking the Help question mark on the left side of the screen, and then selecting ‘UMKC Resources and Policy Statements’. As a UMKC student, you are expected to review and abide by these policies. If you have any questions, please contact your instructor for clarification.

This course follows the “Faculty allowing recording” option of the Academic Inquiry, Course Discussion and Privacy policy.

Academic Calendar: Students are encouraged to review important add, drop or withdraw dates: http://www.umkc.edu/registrar/acal.asp

Academic Honesty: The Board of Curators of the University of Missouri recognizes that academic honesty is essential for the intellectual life of the University. Faculty members have a special obligation to expect high standards of academic honesty in all student work. Students have a special obligation to adhere to such standards. Academic dishonesty, including cheating, plagiarism or sabotage, is adjudicated through the University of Missouri Student Conduct Code and Rules of Procedures in Student Conduct Matters.

Academic Inquiry, Course Discussion and Privacy: Faculty allowing recording - University of Missouri System Executive Order No. 38 lays out principles regarding the sanctity of classroom discussions at the university. The policy is described fully in Section 200.015 of the Collected Rules and Regulations. In this class, students may make audio or video recordings of course activity unless specifically prohibited by the faculty member. However, the redistribution of any audio or video recordings of statements or comments from the course to individuals who are not students in the course is prohibited without the express permission of the faculty member and of any students who are recorded, including those recordings prepared by an instructor. Students found to have violated this policy are subject to discipline in accordance with provisions of Section 200.020 of the Collected Rules and Regulations of the University of Missouri pertaining to student conduct matters.

Those students who have written permission from the course instructor to record are not permitted to redistribute any audio or video recordings of statements or comments from the course to individuals who are not students in the course without the express permission of the faculty member and of any students who are recorded, including those recordings prepared by an instructor. Students found to have violated this policy are subject to discipline in accordance with provisions of Section 200.020 of the Collected Rules and Regulations of the University of Missouri pertaining to student conduct matters.

Attendance Policy: Students are expected to attend and participate in classes. In order to comply with federal regulations associated with eligibility rules for federal financial aid, students not attending a course during the first three weeks of the term will be administratively dropped from the specific course. Advance notice of attendance policies of academic units and individual instructors should be given, and such notice should be in writing. Students should notify instructors of excused absences in advance, where possible. Students who have an excused absence are expected to make arrangements with instructors for alternative or make-up work. Such arrangements should be made in advance of the absence, where possible. Instructors should accommodate excused absences to the extent that an accommodation can be made that does not unreasonably interfere with the learning objectives of the course or unduly burden the instructor. Attendance policies shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner. Enrollment as a student is required to attend any class unless otherwise pre-approved by the instructor. Instructors are responsible for verifying the class roster in Pathway throughout the term.
https://catalog.umkc.edu/undergraduate-academic-regulations-information/attendance-policy/

Campus Safety: Inclement weather, mass notification, and emergency response guide: http://www.umkc.edu/umkcalert/

Counseling and Health Services Available at UMKC: UMKC students may experience many challenges in their lives while attending college – stress, depression, suicidality, trauma, relationship issues, health concerns, etc. As your professor I care about your success and well-being, and want to make you aware of some helpful resources on campus. The UMKC Counseling Center (www.umkc.edu/counselingcenter), offers a wide range of supportive services to students. Appointments can be made by calling 816.235.1635. UMKC Student Health and Wellness (http://info.umkc.edu/studenthealth/), offers a full range of health care and promotion services. Appointments can be scheduled online or by calling 816.235.6133. The MindBody Connection (www.umkc.edu/mindbody) is located in the Atterbury Student Success Center in Room 112 and offers a variety of stress-reduction services.

Disability Support Services: To obtain disability related accommodations and/or auxiliary aids, students with disabilities must contact the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities (OSSD) as soon as possible. To contact OSSD, call (816) 235-5696. Once verified, OSSD will notify the course instructor and outline the accommodation and/or auxiliary aids to be provided. For more information go to: http://www.umkc.edu/disability/

English Proficiency Statement: Students who encounter difficulty in their courses because of the English proficiency of their instructors should speak directly with their instructors. If additional assistance is needed, students may contact the UMKC Help Line at 816-235-2222 for assistance.

Grade Appeal Policy: Students are responsible for meeting the standards of academic performance established for each course in which they are enrolled. The establishment of the criteria for grades and the evaluation of student academic performance are the responsibilities of the instructor.
The University grade appeal procedure is available only for the review of allegedly capricious grading and not for review of the instructor's evaluation of the student's academic performance. Capricious grading, as that term is used here, comprises any of the following:

• The assignment of a grade to a particular student on some basis other than the performance in the course;

• The assignment of a grade to a particular student according to more exacting or demanding standards than were applied to other students in the course; (Note: Additional or different grading criteria may be applied to graduate students enrolled for graduate credit in 300- and 400-level courses.)

• The assignment of a grade by a substantial departure from the instructor's previously announced standards.

Discrimination Grievance Procedures for Students: Discrimination Grievance Procedures for Students can be found here: http://www.umsystem.edu/ums/rules/collected_rules/grievance/ch390/grievance_390.010

Statement of Human Rights: The Board of Curators and UMKC are committed to the policy of equal opportunity, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability and status as a Vietnam era veteran. Commitment to the policy is mentored by the Office of Diversity and Inclusion, but it is the responsibility of the entire university community to provide equal opportunity through relevant practices, initiatives and programs.

Title IX: Under the University of Missouri’s Title IX policy, discrimination, violence and harassment based on sex, gender, and gender identity are subject to the same kinds of accountability and support applied to offenses based on other protected characteristics such as race, color, ethnic or national origin, sexual orientation, religion, age, ancestry, disability, military status, and veteran status. If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources by visiting UMKC’s Title IX Office webpage (http://info.umkc.edu/title9/) or contacting UMKC’s Title IX Coordinator at 816.235.6910. You can file a complaint using UMKC’s online discrimination complaint form, which is located at http://info.umkc.edu/title9/reporting/report-online/.

UMKC Connect: Important information is available to undergraduate students in UMKC Connect accessed through Canvas/Blackboard. Throughout the term, students may receive emails regarding course grades or academic performance. Students are expected to address information posted in a timely fashion. This information may be shared with the student’s Success Network made up his or her academic advisor(s) and other campus resources so that UMKC may fully support the student’s success.

Course Summary:
Date	Details
Mon Sep 16, 2019	Assignment One minute feedback, Database security	due by 11:59pm
Fri Apr 24, 2020	Assignment Discuss13b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Fri May 1, 2020	Assignment Discuss14b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Fri May 8, 2020	Assignment Discuss15b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Tue Jun 9, 2020	Assignment Quiz03a, History of SQL	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz06a, Null values	due by 11:59pm
Wed Jun 17, 2020	Assignment Discuss01a, Introduce yourself	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss01b, How do you plan to access SQL	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss02a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss03a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss03b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz02a, The SELECT statement	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw02a, Practice using the SELECT statement	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw02b, Practice using the SELECT statement for EHR Data	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz03a. Introduction to Structured Query Language	due by 11:59pm
Fri Jul 3, 2020	Assignment Discuss04a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss04b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss05a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss05b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss06a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss06b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz04a, Sorting and restricting	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw04a, Practice with sorting and restricting data - EHR Data	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw04b, Practice with the where keyword	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw06a, Practice with null values	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz05, Database security	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz06, Null values	due by 11:59pm
Fri Jul 10, 2020	Assignment Discuss07a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss07b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz07a, Single Row Functions	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz07b, Date Functions	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz07c, General functions	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw07a, Practice with Single Row Functions	due by 11:59pm
Fri Jul 17, 2020	Assignment Discuss08a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss08b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss09a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss09b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss10a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss10b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss11a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss11b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss12a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss12b. Review this week's readings	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz08a, Statistical summary functions	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz09a, Conversion Functions and Conditional Expressions	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz11a Retrieving data from multiple tables	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz12 on displaying data from multiple tables	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw08a, Practice with statistical summaries	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw09a, Conversion Functions and Conditional Expressions	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw10a, Metadata for databases with more than one table	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw11a, Use the acupuncture for headache database	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw12 a,b on displaying data from multiple tables	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw12a,b Retreiving data from multiple tables	due by 11:59pm
Fri Jul 24, 2020	Assignment Discuss13a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss14a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Discuss15a, One minute feedback	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz14 - Using Set Operators	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Quiz15 - Using subqueries	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw13, Handing mismatches	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw14 - Using Set Operators	due by 11:59pm
Assignment Hw15 - Using Subqueries	due by 11:59pm
Fri Jul 31, 2020	Assignment Final Exam	due by 11:59pm
Assignment One minute feedback, Overview of relational database and history of SQL	 
Course assignments are not 