Page01d, Information Services (IS)
 
Information Services (Links to an external site.) provides faculty, staff and students with state-of-the-art information technology by offering a wide range of computing, multimedia, telecommunications systems and networking facilities. In support of the University's goal to provide quality instruction, Information Services provides tools to enable learning, discovery, research, service and innovation.

A quick link to Information Services is available in the "Help" menu located in the left-hand Canvas navigation menu.

Information Services in the Help Menu

Contact Us
Live Chat: UMKC Helpdesk (Links to an external site.)
In-Person Assistance:
9 AM - 5 PM, Monday – Friday
Fine Arts Building, Room 314
Phone: 816-235-6700
This number is answered 24/7. 
We provide assistance with Canvas, Panopto, and other teaching/learning software.
Email: callcenter@umkc.edu
Fax: 816-235-6503
Online: Online Problem Report Form (Links to an external site.)
Accounts & E-Mail
Changing and Resetting Your Single Sign-On (SSO) Password (Links to an external site.)
Check Your Email Online (Links to an external site.)
Email Phishing Scams (Links to an external site.)
Email Setup for Mobile Devices (Links to an external site.)
Faculty/Staff/Student Lookup (Links to an external site.)
MS Office 365 ProPlus (Links to an external site.)
Office 365 Email Support (Links to an external site.)
Hardware/Software Support & Training
Antivirus Software & Support (Links to an external site.)
Apple Support (Links to an external site.)
Forms (Links to an external site.)
Getting Started with IT Resources for Students at UMKC (Links to an external site.)
Official UMKC Mobile Apps (Links to an external site.)
Online Problem Reporting (Links to an external site.)
Purchasing Computers for Personal Use (Links to an external site.)
REDCap Information Page (Links to an external site.)
Software (Links to an external site.)
Computing Resources
Audio & Video Services Support (Links to an external site.)
Campus Labs Home (Links to an external site.)
ILE Classrooms (Links to an external site.)
Networking & Files (Links to an external site.)
Phones & Voicemail (Links to an external site.)
Remote Labs (Links to an external site.)
Residence Halls (Dorms) (Links to an external site.)
VPN (Links to an external site.)
Wireless Network Configuration & Coverage (Links to an external site.)
Online Learning & Collaboration
Panopto Coursecasting & Podcasting (Links to an external site.)
Pathway (Links to an external site.)
Web Pages